# Wk02x08 - IO in more detail

Haskell is built mainly on *pure functions* - values are taken as arguments, processing occurs and a result is returned without side effects. Functions don't depend on the state of anything else external to them and is entirely self contained and independent. The same inputs always yield the same outputs.

## IO is impure

Since IO functions interact with the outside world, they can't be functional. `getLine` doesn't always return the same result when you feed it `"> "`, it gives you whatever the user puts in.

To combat this, special `IO()` types are used so that pure and impure functions remain somewhat separated. We know from a type if it's involved with IO or not.

## Action sequencing 

In pure functions, the order that stuff is evaluated in doesn't matter. For example: 

```hs
let a = reverse "winston"
    b = reverse "churchill"
in "sir " ++ a ++ " " ++ b
```

`a` could be evaluated before `b` or vice versa and the output would be the same in both cases.

This is, however, not the case with IO functions - they have to be executed in a specific order, a specific sequence of operations. For this, we use the `do` block.

```hs
let greet() = do 
    planet <- getLine
    home <- getLine
    putStrLn ("greetings " ++ planet ++ "ling.")
    putStrLn ("I am from " ++ home ++ ".")
    putStrLn "Take me to your leader."
-- or
do { planet <- getLine; home <- getLine; putStrLn ("greetings " ++ planet ++ "ling."); putStrLn ("I am from " ++ home ++ "."); putStrLn "Take me to your leader."}
```

`planet` must be evaluated before `home` so we don't get a value intended for `home` in `planet`. We also want our outputs to be executed in the right order, ie. greeting, explanation and then command.

## `do` is syntactic sugar

`do` hides some of the more complex functions of the Haskell language away, specifically the `bind` operator and whatever the hell monads are.

> Underneath, it is rewritten as a chain of function calls where the output of the first function becomes the input of the second function. The bind operator accomplishes this function sequencing. It is a key part of the IO monad. We are starting to scratch the surface of Haskell IO and discover it is highly complex. We will reserve discussion of Monads and bind operators for later in the course.

## In summary...

* IO operations are impure
* `do` blocks specify actions that have to happen in the sequence they are written in
* `<-` is used for variable definitions instead of `=`
* any value or function that involves IO has `IO` in its type
* a sequence of IO actions is described as being in the `IO Monad`
