# Wk03x11 - Type Classes

In Haskell, there are various number like types (for example, `Int`, `Float` and the infinite precision `Integer`). However, we can apply operators like `+` and `*` to combinations of values of differing types.

This is facilitated by the use of type classes. A type class is a family of similar types.

For example, if we get the type hint of the addition operator, we can see that it takes any values of type `Num`.

```haskell
Prelude> :type (+)
(+) :: Num a => a -> a -> a
```

`Num` isn't a concrete type itself, it's actually a type class that can be applied to a concrete type.

## Types of type classes

The following is a sample of some of the type classes included in the Haskell programming language.

* `Show` is one of the type classes we've already met. It allows string values to be created that represent a value of a given type.
  * This is used by the `show` function
  * For example, `show 42 -- > "42"`

* `Eq` is used to say that these types can be compared with one another.
  * `Eq` is used by the equality operator `==`, for example.
* `Ord` is used for ordering and performing inequalities on/of values.
  * This requires members of that type class to implement functions like `<` and `>`.
* `Read` allows us to generate values of a given type from a string value.
  * It is used by the `read` function
  * For example, `read "42" :: Int -- > 42` or `read "True" :: Bool -- > True`

## Using type classes

```haskell
data SimpleNum = One | Two | Many deriving (Show, Read, Eq)
```

In this example, we can say that our type `SimpleNum` derives from the `Show`, `Read` and `Eq` type classes.

We can now do things like the following:

```haskell
Prelude> data SimpleNum = One | Two | Many deriving (Show, Read, Eq)
Prelude> show One
"One"
Prelude> read "Two" :: SimpleNum
Two
Prelude> Two == One
False
Prelude> One == One
True
```

## Implementations of type class functions

Type classes act a little like interfaces - they say that a type has to have a given function that does a given thing. In most cases, Haskell provides a default implementation of these functions for each type class.

