# Wk06x03 - Type classes in more detail

## Type class and instance declarations

A type class is a set of types for which a specific operation has been defined, similar to an `interface{}` in other languages, like Go. Some are defined in the Prelude, but you can also define your own.

### A type for bright classes

```haskell
data Bright = Blue | Red deriving (Read, Show)

darkBright :: Bright -> Bool
darkBright Blue = True
darkBright Red  = False

lightenBright :: Bright -> Bright
lightenBright Blue = Red
lightenBright Red = Red
```

### A type for milder colors

```haskell
data Pastel = Turquoise | Tan deriving (Read, Show)

darkPastel :: Pastel -> Bool
darkPastel Turquoise = True
darkPastel Tan       = False

lightenPastel :: Pastel -> Pastel
lightenPastel Turquoise = Tan
lightenPastel Tan       = Tan
```

### Defining a type class

Both our types have functions to determine if a given colour is dark and to lighten a given colour. We can define a `Colour` type class and its related functions to get around this.

```haskell
class Colour a where
    dark :: a -> bool
    lighten :: a -> a
```

This says that `Colour` is a type class, that the variable `a` is a particular type in that type class and for any type `a` in `Colour`, you can use the `dark` and `lighten` functions with the specified types.

### Defining instances for the type classes

An `instance` declaration is used in order to bind a type to a type class. Within one, the functions of the type class are mapped to functions that already exist.

This is making the `Bright` and `Pastel` types members of the `Colour` type class and mapping their functions to functions of the type class.

```haskell
instance Colour Bright where
    dark = darkBright
    lighten = lightenBright

instance Colour Pastel where
    dark = darkPastel
    lighten = lightenPastel
```

## Predefined type classes

### The `Num` class

(The below is part of the declaration for the `Num` type class, with modified function names)

```haskell
class Num a where
    (+), (-), (*) :: a -> a -> a
    
addInt, subInt, mulInt :: Int -> Int -> Int
addDbl, subDbl, mulDbl :: Double -> Double -> Double

instance Num Int where
    (+) = addInt
    (-) = subInt
    (*) = mulInt

instance Num Double where
    (+) = addDbl
    (-) = subDbl
    (*) = mulDbl
```

#### Hierachy

Since some operators can only be used on certain types of numbers, the `Num` type class has a hierarchy to it.

* `Integral` - types that represent integer values: `Int`, `Integer`, etc.
* `Fractional` - fractions
* `Floating` - `Float`, `Double`, etc.
* `Bounded` - numeric types that have a minimal and maximal element
* `Bits` - types where you can access the representation as binary, as a sequence of bits.

### The `Show` class

The `show` function (`show :: Show a => a -> String`) has a type class `Show`, since not all values can be shown (converted to a string). 

```haskell
data Foo = Bar | Baz

instance Show Foo where
    show Bar = "it is a bar"
    show Baz = "this is a baz"
```

```haskell
Prelude> Bar
it is a bar
Prelude> Baz
this is a baz
```

### Other built-in type classes

* `Num`
* `Read` - can be "read" from a string representation
* `Show` - can be "shown" as a string
* `Eq` - types with the equality operator (`==`) defined
* `Ord` - types that can be ordered/that have inequality operators (`>`, `<`) defined on them
* `Enum` - types where values can be *enum*erated in sequence, for example in notation like `[1..n]` or `['a'..'z']`