# Wk01x02
## Expressions and equations

### Expressions

**Haskell has no statements, and only expressions.**

* In imperative languages (like C or Java)
  * expressions denote small computations (eg `2*x`)
  * statements handle sequencing, looping, conditionals and large scale computations

* Pure function languages don't have statements - only expressions
* All computation is done by evaluating expressions

#### Integer expressions

```hs
2 -- > 2
3+4 -- > 7
3+4*5    {equivalent to 3+(4*5)} -- > 23
(3+4)*5   {equivalent to 7*5} -- > 35
```

Operator precendence and grouping (through brackets) applies just as in any other language. The [reference documentation](https://www.haskell.org/onlinereport/exps.html) has a list of all operators and their precedences.

#### Function applications

Functions work as they do in other languages.

```hs
abs 5 -- > 5
abs (-6) -- > 6
abs -6 -- this errors out
```

Note the syntax - function arguments are provided separated by a space. They do not usually require brackets.

For functions with several arguments...

```hs
min 3 8 -- > 3
max 3 8 -- > 8
```

#### Function precendence

`f x + 3` means `(f x) 3`, not `f (x+3)`. If an argument to a function is an expression, it should be surrounded by brackets.

Function application also binds greater than anything else - `sqrt 9+7` will evaluate to `10.0`, since it is evaluated as `(sqrt 9)+7`. `sqrt (9+7)` will evaluate to `4.0`, as expected.

### Equations

Equations are used to name values.

```hs
x = 5*y
```

#### Equations are not assignments

A name can only ever be given a single value in Haskell. What you may be inclined to call a variable is actually defined as a constant.

```hs
n = 1    -- fine
x = 3*n  -- fine
n = x    -- invalid: cannot redefine n
```

#### `n = n + 1` and `n += 1`

Imperative languages allow *assignments* like `n = n + 1` - this is not an equation (there are no equations in imperative languages, after all). In Haskell, while it may be valid to write `n = n + 1`, it will not be possible to compute. This is an *equation* and not an assignment, meaning that this will essentially loop forever. Haskell will try to compute a value, but it will fail and timeout.

Equations behave the same as they would in maths. You are asserting that the left hand side of the equation is equal to the right hand side of the equation.

#### Computation without assignment

An assignment statement does three things.

1. The right hand side of the statement is evaluated to compute a useful value
2. Any preexisting value on the left hand side is discarded
3. The new value from the right hand side is put in the place of the value that was on the left hand side.

Pure functional languages never allow a programmer to destroy old values, only compute new useful ones. If an old value is not referenced anywhere else, it'll be garbage collected.

### Trying Haskell

Once Haskell is installed on your system, you can run `ghci` to get an interactive Haskell interpreter. This can be exited using `:quit`.

```
â¯ ghci
GHCi, version 8.10.2: https://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
Prelude> abs 5
5
Prelude> abs (-6)
6
Prelude> min 3 8
3
Prelude> max 3 8
8
Prelude> n = 1
Prelude> x = 3 * n
Prelude> n = x
Prelude> n
3
Prelude> x * n
9
Prelude> :quit
Leaving GHCi.
```