# Wk01x08
## Reduction, functions and lists

### Reduction

In an imperative programming language, statements are executed sequentially - one after the other. In a functional programming language, there are no statements, so *reduction* is used for execution.

Reduction is the process of incrementally simplifying an expression. For example:

```hs
3 + (4 * 5)
3 + 20
23
```

Reduction is the sole method of execution of a functional program, as all computation is achieved solely with expressions.

An expression can only ever have one final result, however it could have multiple reduction paths. A result will never depend on the so-called *reduction path* (the [Church-Rosser theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Church%E2%80%93Rosser_theorem)). 

* Correctness does not depend on the order of evaluation
* A compiler or interpreter can change the order of evaluation in order to improve performance
* Different expressions can be evaluated in parallel without affecting the result of an overall expression.
  * As a result, functional languages could be very useful for future parallel computing systems

### Functions

Functions in Haskell (and any functional programming language) will always produce the same result for a given set of inputs, like a mathematical function. This also means that there are no side-effects in a function.

Functions can also only return a single value.

#### Function definitions

Haskell has various functions available in the standard library, called the *prelude*.

Obviously, you can also define your own functions. A function is defined by an equation:

```hs
f = \x -> x + 1 -- lambda
f x = x + 1 -- named
```

This can also be expressed as `f(x) = x + 1` in mathematical notation.

#### Function application

A function application is an expression like `f 31` - calling function `f` with the integer argument of `31`. It's evaluated by replacing it with the body of the specified function and parameters with the arguments, much like a macro in C++ or Rust.

```hs
f = \x -> x + 1

f 3
(x+1) where x = 3
3+1
4
```

If you really wanted to, you could also use a lambda function straight away.

```hs
(\x -> x + 1) 4
```

#### Multiple arguments

```hs
add3nums = \x y z -> x + y + z

10 + 4 * add3nums 1 2 3

10 + (4 * (add3nums 1 2 3))
10 + (4 * 6)
10 + 24
34
```

### Lists

Basic list syntax is the same as Python. Haskell lists are also immutable.

#### Functions with several return values

If a function has several return values, they will have to be returned as parts of a list. 

```hs
minmax = \x y -> [min x y, max x y]
minmax 3 8 -- > [3,8]
```

#### Evaluation order

Elements of a list are not evaluated when the list is initialised, rather they are evaluated when they are used. Take the following list as an example:

```hs
answer = 42
li = [7, answer + 1, 7 * 8]
li -- > [7, 43, 56]
```

Expressions inside of `li` are only evaluated when it is referenced, in this case on line three. If you don't access the expression, it's not evaluated.

#### Construction of lists

##### Appending

Multiple lists can be appended to each other using the `++` operator, giving you a new one containing all elements.

```hs
[23, 29] ++ [48, 41, 44] -- > [23, 29, 48, 41, 44]
```

##### Prepending (is that a word?)

A single item can be added to the front of a list using the `:` operator. This is called the "cons" operator.

```hs
23 : [48, 41, 44] -- > [23, 48, 41, 44]
```

##### Sequences

Mathematical notion for a sequence of consecutive numbers up to `n` is `0, 1, ..., n`. Haskell also has sequence notation for construction of lists. Note that it's not limited only to numbers, but actually anything that can be iterated - this includes characters, for example.

```hs
[0..5] -- > [0,1,2,3,4,5]
[100..103] -- > [100,101,102,103]

['a', 'e'] -- > "abcde"
['0', '5'] -- > "012345"

[0x0A .. 0x1F] -- > [10,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,21,22,23,24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31]
```

This is also cool, that said I couldn't find any docs on it after a brief look.

```hs
[0,2..10] -- > [0,2,4,6,8,10]
[0,3..10] -- > [0,3,6,9]
```


##### List comprehensions

A list comprehension is automatically transformed into an expression by the compiler.

```hs
[3 * x | x <- [1..10]] -- > [3,6,9,12,15,18,21,24,27,30]
[2*x | x <- [0..10]] -- > [0,2,4,6,8,10,12,14,16,18,20]
[2*x + 1 | x <- [0..10]] -- >   [1,3,5,7,9,11,13,15,17,19,21]
[[a,b] | a <- [10,11,12] , b <- [20,21]] -- > [[10,20],[10,21],[11,20],[11,21],[12,20],[12,21]]
```

#### Working with lists

##### Length of a list

```hs
length ["A", "list", "of", "strings"] -- > 4
```

##### Indexing a list

Indexes in Haskell start at zero.

The `!!` operator can be used to lookup a value in a list given the index.

```hs
[5, 3, 8, 7] !! 2 -- > 8
[0 .. 100] !! 81 -- > 81
['a'..'z'] !! 13 -- > 'n'
```

If the index is out of bounds (and it cannot be negative, like in Python), `undefined` is returned.

##### `head` and `tail`

The head (the first element of a list) and the tail (every element that's not the first in a list) can be found using standard library functions.

```hs
head::[a] -- > a
head::[4, 5, 6] -- > 4
tail::[a] -- > [a]
tail::[4, 5, 6] -- > [5,6]
```

These return `undefined` if the list is empty.

#### I mentioned lists are lazy, right?

A little more about that.

Because list elements are only evaluated when they are needed, you can create literally infinite lists.

```hs
[1..] -- > [1,2,3,4,5,5,7,8,9...
```

Another example of this is the `primes` function in the `Data.Numbers.Primes` package, which returns an infinite list of prime numbers.

Because lists are lazily evaluated, you can also create lists would take a very long time to evaluate were you to evaluate everything at once.

This also means that you can define something that doesn't actually work. In the case below, you wouldn't know you've done something weird unless you try to access the third element.

```hs
xs = [1, 2, xs !! 5, 4]
xs !! 2 -- > *** Exception: Prelude.!!: index too large
```

As a result of lazy evaluation, we can also do even weirder stuff like this.

```hs
xs = [1, 2, xs2 !! 5, 4]
xs2 = xs ++ xs
xs2 !! 2 -- > 2
xs !! 2 -- > 2
```
